---
title: Technology will Save Climate Change 
absrtact: How to solve climate change using new source of energy
introduction: In this article, I discussed wether climate change is real, how bad it is, and how do we save climate change forever using nuclear energy. 
category: Science
published: true
date: 7/31/2023
---


# Technology will save climate change
On April 4, 2022, the IPCC(Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) released
its new climate [report](https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/). The report states what climate changes look like in 2022, what threats are we facing right now, and what should we do against climate change. The report shows that the global average temperature in 2022 is about 1.15 C above the average between 1850-1900. 

But, before you started to worry about humans going extinct due to climate change, let's first dive into what is climate change and what causes it. 

By the definition from [United Nations](https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/what-is-climate-change): ”Climate change refers to long-term shifts in temperature and weather patterns."These shifts happen naturally all the time like a cycle of ice ages followed by a warm period for a period of around 100,000 years. So How do we know the temperature changes right now are not just another natural cycle?

A [research](https://www.science.org/doi/full/10.1126/science.1228026) published in *Science* the temperature change over the last 11,300 years suggests that the rate of temperature rise during the last century was unprecedented throughout history. 

The rise in temperature started roughly around the 1800s, the time that the industrial revolution started. During the industrial revolution, machines were widely adopted for the production of various goods. Those machines burn fossil fuels and emit greenhouse gases including carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and water vapor.  Those greenhouse gases are mainly responsible for climate change. Excessive greenhouse gas in the atmosphere acts like a quilt surrounding the Earth, trapping the heat inside Earth’s atmosphere. Therefore, causing the temperature to rise. Among those greenhouse gases, carbon dioxide is the most common one. 

Carbon dioxide is generated naturally all the time. Animals breathe out carbon dioxide into the air, volcanoes emit carbon dioxide into the atmosphere during their eruption, and also forest fire also produce carbon dioxide when lighting hits a forest and cause a fire. However, the carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere sharply rose by around 40% after the industrial revolution, compared to the highest point [in the last 11,000 years](https://climate.nasa.gov/climate_resources/24/graphic-the-relentless-rise-of-carbon-dioxide/). This is clearly a result of the industrial revolution. 

One of the most impactful results of putting excess carbon dioxide into the atmosphere is a rise in global temperature which causes the sea level to rise. The sea level rose around [8-9 inches (21-24 cm) since 1880](https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-climate/climate-change-global-sea-level). The computer models predict that the sea level will rise around another foot (25-30 cm) based on the sea level right now. The rise in the sea level will threaten human civilation. Take the United States as an example, 30% of the total population lives in coastal areas where the rise of sea level causes flooding, sealine erosion, and storm. We basically built a civilization that is vulnerable to the change in sea level. 

However, the good news is we are not doomed. There are solutions to climate change. Since climate change is caused by excessive carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and since those carbon dioxides are the product of burning fossil fuels, we can stop climate change by not using fossil fuels. These fossil fuels include coal, oil, and natural gas. They are made from decomposing plants and animals. Fossil fuels take millions of years to form. What we are using right now is formed by plants and animals 362-286 million years ago. So even if we want to continue to use fossil fuels in the future, the supply won’t catch up with usage and we will run out of fossil fuels one day. It is crystal clear that we need a new source of energy. This energy best be clean, which means it won’t cause emissions like fossil fuel. We are adopting solar, wind, and tidal powers but they have low efficiency, which means we need huge amounts of solar panels or wind turbines to generate enough energy. So is there a source of energy that is clean, highly efficient, and can be used in the near future? 

A good replacement is nuclear power. Nuclear power uses nuclear reactions to produce electricity. It is zero-emission energy. There are different types of nuclear reactions. The one we are able to control right now is called fission. In principle, a nuclear fission reaction is started by two particles colliding, which causes a particle to escape from them at a speed close to the speed of light. This escaped particle then collides with another particle and repeats the process. This is called chain reaction and that’s the reason why nuclear reaction can produce huge amounts of energy with little mass. It has an efficiency way higher than fossil fuels. I would say using nuclear power to generate energy is a better idea than making it a nuclear bomb. 

Due to the power of nuclear reaction, is it really safe for a controlled source of energy? Not entirely right now. The Chernobyl Nuclear Power Station in Ukraine shows how deadly when nuclear power goes wrong. Power always comes with danger like fire, electricity, and now nuclear power. However, should we abandon the power just because it’s dangerous? A car goes at a speed of 60 miles per hour on the road and it can be deadly if a car hits a pedestrian. Should we abandon cars because they can cause death? No, we develop a system that can use the power of the car and minimize its damage at the same time. New technologies keep emerging and society accommodates them. We make mistakes along the way, we learn from those mistakes, and we create a better solution. 

[Right now](https://world-nuclear.org/information-library/current-and-future-generation/nuclear-power-in-the-world-today.aspx), 10% of global energy is provided by nuclear energy with around 440 power reactors. The world is expecting to double the global nuclear power capacity by the time of 2050 to reach a net-zero emission target and maintain a global temperature of 1.5 celsius above the average level before the industrial revolution ever since. 

There are also other possible clean energy sources like nuclear fusion, which is the sun’s energy source. Nuclear fusion has a higher efficiency than nuclear fission. In theory, it is a better energy source than nuclear fission. However, the heat generated by nuclear fusion is so high that none of the known containers is able to hold it. However, it is not controllable right now doesn’t mean it will not be controllable in the future. It’s only 200 years since the industrial revolution and we managed to send people to the moon and sustain life in outer space like the international space station. The progress of technology is at an exponential speed. Computers’ speed and power have generally doubled every one and a half to two years since the 1960s. On the contrary, the global temperature rise is roughly at a linear speed. Therefore, in the foreseeable future, we will find a solution using technology long before the climate on Earth become unlivable. 

If we look at Earth for a longer span of time, the Earth has been there for around 4.5 billion years. For another 5 billion years, the sun will run out of fuel. It will first collapse due to gravity, the density increase, and eventually explode. This expansion of the heat wave will evaporate every last drop of water on earth until the sun swallows the earth. There could also be other catastrophes happening during these 5 billion years like a major asteroid impact, supervolcano, or even a global pandemic. The Black Death in history killed around 200 million people at that time which is around half of the population at that time. The environment we live in is not always going to be comfortable. There are worse disasters than climate change, but we managed to solve them. The global pandemic that started at the end of 2019 has struck heavily on all aspects of society. It caused a total number of 637 million deaths, around 8% of the total population. Scientists quickly developed the vaccine for COVID-19 and stopped it from going worse. We tackled COVID-19 by technology as we tackle other disasters. 

There are always going to be problems and we are going to solve them using technology. We will land on Mars one day. We will escape before the Earth is destroyed. We will make life multi-planetary. Same for climate change. It is caused by the progress of technology and it will be solved by the progress of technology. 

#PROJECT/BLOG
